DOC: add NEP 54 on SIMD - moving to C++ and adopting Highway (or not) (#24138)
numpy/numpy: doc/neps/nep-0054-simd-cpp-highway.rst

.. _NEP54:

===================================================================================
NEP 54 — SIMD infrastructure evolution: adopting Google Highway when moving to C++?
===================================================================================

:Author: Sayed Adel, Jan Wassenberg, Matti Picus, Ralf Gommers
:Status: Draft
:Type: Standards Track
:Created: 2023-07-06
:Resolution: TODO

Abstract
--------

We are moving the SIMD intrinsic framework, Universal Intrinsics, from C to
C++. We have also moved to Meson as the build system. The Google Highway
intrinsics project is proposing we use Highway instead of our Universal
Intrinsics as described in `NEP 38`_. This is a complex and multi-faceted
decision - this NEP is an attempt to describe the trade-offs involved and
what would need to be done.

Motivation and Scope
--------------------

> We want to refactor the C-based Universal Intrinsics (see :ref:`NEP 38
> <NEP38>`) to C++. Along the way, the `Google Highway`_ devs proposed using
> Highway rather than our Universal Intrinsics.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We want to refactor the C-based Universal Intrinsics (see :ref:`NEP 38
<NEP38>`) to C++. This work was ongoing for some time, and Google's Highway
was suggested as an alternative, which was already written in C++ and had 
support for scalable SVE and other reusable components (such as VQSort).
```

Google Highway to replace our current Universal Intrinsics framework, including
but not limited to:

- Maintainability, domain expertise availability, ease of onboarding new
  contributor, and other social aspects,
- Key technical differences and constraints that may impact NumPy's internal
  design or performance,
- Build system related aspects,
- Release timing related aspects.

Out of scope (at least for now) is revisiting other aspects of our current SIMD
support strategy:

- accuracy vs. performance trade-offs when adding SIMD support to a function
- use of SVML and x86-simd-sort (and possibly its equivalents for aarch64)
- pulling in individual bits or algorithms of Highway (as in `gh-24018`_) or
  SLEEF (as discussed in that same PR)

Usage and Impact
----------------

N/A - there will be no significant user-visible changes.

Backward compatibility
----------------------

There will be no changes in user-facing Python or C APIs: all the methods to
control compilation and runtime CPU feature selection should remain, although
there may be some changes due to moving to C++ without regards to the
Highway/Universal Intrinsics choice.

> The naming of the CPU features in Highway is different from that of the
> Universal Intrinsics. Highway uses clusters of features based on physical CPU
> releases, where Universal Intrinsics uses feature names.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The naming of the CPU features in Highway is different from that of the
Universal Intrinsics (see "Supported features/targets" below)
```

implemented in a way that fairly balances across CPU architectures.

Regarding the support status and whether all currently-supported architectures
will remain supported, Jan stated that Highway can commit to the following:

1. If it cross-compiles with Clang and can be tested via standard QEMU, it can
   go into Highway's CI.
2. If it cross-compiles via clang/gcc and can be tested with a new QEMU
   (possibly with extra flags), then it can be support via manual testing
   before each Highway release.
3. Existing targets will remain supported as long as they compile/run in QEMU.

Highway is not subject to Google's "no longer supported" strategy (or, as
written in its README, *This is not an officially supported Google product*).
That is not a bad thing; it means that it is less likely to go unsupported due
to a Google business decision about the project. Quite a few well-known open
source projects under the ``google`` GitHub org state this, e.g. `JAX`_ and
`tcmalloc`_.

Supported features/targets
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Both frameworks support a large set of platforms and SIMD instruction sets,
as well as generic scalar/fallback versions. The main differences right now are:

> - NumPy supports IBM Z-system (s390x, VX/VXE/VXE2) while Highway does not,

Reviewer 2: A Highway contributor has just added support for Z14 and Z15.

Reviewer 3: Noted.

Compilation strategy for multiple targets and runtime dispatching
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Highway compiles once while using preprocessing tricks to generate multiple
stanzas for each CPU feature within the same compilation unit (see the
``foreach_target.h`` usage and dynamic dispatch docs for how that is done).
Universal Intrinsics generate multiple compilation units, one for each CPU
feature group, and compiles multiple times, linking them all together (with
different names) for runtime dispatch. The Highway technique may not work
reliably on MSVC, the Universal Intrinsic technique does work on MSVC.

Which one is more robust? The experts disagree. Jan thinks that the Highway
approach is more robust and in particular avoids the linker pulling in
functions with too-new instructions into the final binary. Sayed thinks that
the current NumPy approach (also used by OpenCV) is more robust, and in
particular is less likely to run into compiler-specific bugs or catch them
earlier. Both agree the meson build system allows specifying object link order,
which produces more consistent builds. However that does tie NumPy to meson.

> Matti thinks the current build strategy is working well for NumPy and the

Author: So do I:)

advantages of changing the build and runtime dispatch, with possible unknown

> instabilities outweighs the advantages that fully adopting Highway may bring.

Author: ```suggestion
instabilities outweighs the advantages that adopting Highway's dynamic dispatch may bring.
```

Reviewer 3: I incorporated these comments in the last commit

The ``_simd`` unit testing module
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Rewriting the ``_simd testing`` module to use C++ was done very recently in PR
`gh-24069`_. It depends on the main PR for the move to C++, `gh-21057`_.
It allows one to access the C++ intrinsics with almost the same signature, but
from Python. This is a great way not only for testing, but also for designing
new SIMD kernels.

It may be possible to add a similar testing and prototyping feature to Highway
(which uses plain ``googletest``), however currently the NumPy way is quite a
bit nicer.

Math routines
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Math or numerical routines are written at a higher level of abstraction than
the universal intrinsics that are the main focus of this NEP. Highway has only
a limited number of math routines, and they are not precise enough for NumPy's
needs. So either way, NumPy's existing routines (which use universal
intrinsics) will stay, and if we go the Highway route they'll simply have to
use Highway primitives internally. We could still use Highway sorting routines.
If we do accept lower-precision routines (via a user-supplied choice, i.e.
extending ``errstate`` to allow a precision option), we could use

> Highway-native routines.

Reviewer 2: We are also open to adding new higher-precision function versions to Highway, e.g. as part of Sayed's work to port from SVML.

Highway-native routines.

There may be other libraries that have numerical routines that can be reused in
NumPy (e.g., from SLEEF, or perhaps from JPEG XL or some other Highway-using
libraries). There may be a small benefit here, but likely it doesn't matter too
much.

Supported and missing intrinsics
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Some specific intrinsics that NumPy needs may be missing from Highway.
> 
> On the other hand, Highway has more instructions that NumPy's universal
> intrinsics, so it's possible that some future needs for NumPy kernels may
> already be met there.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some specific intrinsics that NumPy needs may be missing from Highway.
Similarly, some intrinsics that NumPy needs to implement routines are already
implemented in Highway and are missing from NumPy.

Highway has more instructions that NumPy's universal intrinsics, so it's 
possible that some future needs for NumPy kernels may already be met there.

Either way, we will always have to implement intrinsics in either solution.
```

Related Work
------------

- `Google Highway`_
- `Xsimd`_
- OpenCV's SIMD framework (`API reference <https://docs.opencv.org/4.x/df/d91/group__core__hal__intrin.html>`__, `docs <https://github.com/opencv/opencv/wiki/CPU-optimizations-build-options>`__)
- `std::experimental::simd <https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/experimental/simd/simd>`__
- See the Related Work section in :ref:`NEP38` for more related work (as of 2019)

Implementation
--------------

TODO

Alternatives
------------

Use Google Highway for dynamic dispatch. Other alternatives include: do nothing and
stay with C universal intrinsics, use `Xsimd`_ as the SIMD framework (less
comprehensive than Highway - no SVE or PowerPC support for example), or

> use/vendor `SLEEF`_ (a good library, but unmaintained since 2021). Neither of

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
use/vendor `SLEEF`_ (a good library, but inconsistently maintained). Neither of
```

.. _NEP54:

===================================================================================
NEP 54 — SIMD infrastructure evolution: adopting Google Highway when moving to C++?
===================================================================================

:Author: Sayed Adel, Jan Wassenberg, Matti Picus, Ralf Gommers
:Status: Draft
:Type: Standards Track
:Created: 2023-07-06
:Resolution: TODO

Abstract
--------

We are moving the SIMD intrinsic framework, Universal Intrinsics, from C to
C++. We have also moved to Meson as the build system. The Google Highway
intrinsics project is proposing we use Highway instead of our Universal
Intrinsics as described in `NEP 38`_. This is a complex and multi-faceted
decision - this NEP is an attempt to describe the trade-offs involved and
what would need to be done.

Motivation and Scope
--------------------

We want to refactor the C-based Universal Intrinsics (see :ref:`NEP 38

> <NEP38>`) to C++. Along the way, the `Google Highway`_ devs proposed using

Reviewer 3: Can you suggest an alternative wording?

but not limited to:

- Maintainability, domain expertise availability, ease of onboarding new
  contributor, and other social aspects,
- Key technical differences and constraints that may impact NumPy's internal
  design or performance,
- Build system related aspects,
- Release timing related aspects.

Out of scope (at least for now) is revisiting other aspects of our current SIMD
support strategy:

- accuracy vs. performance trade-offs when adding SIMD support to a function
- use of SVML and x86-simd-sort (and possibly its equivalents for aarch64)
- pulling in individual bits or algorithms of Highway (as in `gh-24018`_) or
  SLEEF (as discussed in that same PR)

Usage and Impact
----------------

N/A - there will be no significant user-visible changes.

Backward compatibility
----------------------

There will be no changes in user-facing Python or C APIs: all the methods to
control compilation and runtime CPU feature selection should remain, although
there may be some changes due to moving to C++ without regards to the
Highway/Universal Intrinsics choice.

The naming of the CPU features in Highway is different from that of the

> Universal Intrinsics. Highway uses clusters of features based on physical CPU

Reviewer: As far as I know, they're just differently named, such as `HWY_NEON_WITHOUT_AES` and `HWY_NEON` instead of `ASIMD` from NumPy. The features in https://github.com/google/highway/#targets are targeted towards specific x86 CPUs, but I think that's different and only applies to that platform as far as I can see.

new SIMD kernels.

It may be possible to add a similar testing and prototyping feature to Highway
(which uses plain ``googletest``), however currently the NumPy way is quite a
bit nicer.

Math routines
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Math or numerical routines are written at a higher level of abstraction than
the universal intrinsics that are the main focus of this NEP. Highway has only
a limited number of math routines, and they are not precise enough for NumPy's
needs. So either way, NumPy's existing routines (which use universal
intrinsics) will stay, and if we go the Highway route they'll simply have to
use Highway primitives internally. We could still use Highway sorting routines.
If we do accept lower-precision routines (via a user-supplied choice, i.e.
extending ``errstate`` to allow a precision option), we could use
Highway-native routines.

There may be other libraries that have numerical routines that can be reused in
NumPy (e.g., from SLEEF, or perhaps from JPEG XL or some other Highway-using
libraries). There may be a small benefit here, but likely it doesn't matter too
much.

Supported and missing intrinsics
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Some specific intrinsics that NumPy needs may be missing from Highway.

Reviewer: I can bolster this with https://github.com/numpy/numpy/pull/23603/files, where I had to add some intrinsics. I think both will require some intrinsics being added, and we'll also have to add them in future for new instruction sets anyway 😸

Reviewer 3: The intent here was specifically to replace the current set of intrinsics being used in NumPy with intrinsics from Highway, clearly future work (different kernels and different instruction sets) may require additional intrinsics.

Reviewer: Hmm, I don't understand your response. The PR adds tan with NumPy intrinsics, and I had to implement the negative intrinsic. We will always have to implement intrinsics in either solution.

On the other hand, Highway has more instructions that NumPy's universal
intrinsics, so it's possible that some future needs for NumPy kernels may
already be met there.

Related Work
------------

- `Google Highway`_
- `Xsimd`_
- OpenCV's SIMD framework (`API reference <https://docs.opencv.org/4.x/df/d91/group__core__hal__intrin.html>`__, `docs <https://github.com/opencv/opencv/wiki/CPU-optimizations-build-options>`__)
- `std::experimental::simd <https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/experimental/simd/simd>`__
- See the Related Work section in :ref:`NEP38` for more related work (as of 2019)

Implementation
--------------

TODO

Alternatives
------------

> It's probably one or the other - move our universal intrinsics to C++, or use
> Google Highway for dynamic dispatch. Other alternatives include: do nothing and
> stay with C universal intrinsics, use `Xsimd`_ as the SIMD framework (less

Reviewer: This sentence confused me, deleting the first bit un-confused me with the high-level scope of the NEP being to move to C++ in an undecided form.

```suggestion
Use Google Highway for dynamic dispatch. Other alternatives include: do nothing and
stay with C universal intrinsics, use `Xsimd`_ as the SIMD framework (less
```

comprehensive than Highway - no SVE or PowerPC support for example), or

> use/vendor `SLEEF`_ (a good library, but unmaintained since 2021). Neither of

Reviewer: SLEEF is now being updated.

but not limited to:

- Maintainability, domain expertise availability, ease of onboarding new
  contributor, and other social aspects,
- Key technical differences and constraints that may impact NumPy's internal
  design or performance,
- Build system related aspects and impact on our plans for upstreaming CPU and
  compiler feature detection and multi-target library building into Meson,
- Release timing related aspects.

Out of scope (at least for now) is revisiting other aspects of our current SIMD
support strategy:

- accuracy vs. performance trade-offs when adding SIMD support to a function
- use of SVML and x86-simd-sort (and possibly its equivalents for aarch64)
- pulling in individual bits or algorithms of Highway (as in `gh-24018`_) or
  SLEEF (as discussed in that same PR)

Usage and Impact
----------------

N/A - there will be no significant user-visible changes.

Backward compatibility
----------------------

There will be no changes in user-facing Python or C APIs: all the methods to
control compilation and runtime CPU feature selection should remain, although
there may be some changes due to moving to Meson and C++ without regards to the

> Highway/Universal Intrinsics choice.

Reviewer 2: Right. But detecting/allowing a feature is not enough, there actually have to be intrinsics using it. I'm not sure how much numpy does with AVX-only or specific AVX-512 subsets outside those supported by Skylake and Zen4/Icelake? If not much, then there is no practical impact.

> Highway/Universal Intrinsics choice.

Reviewer 4: A lot of the code in `numpy/core/src/umath/loops_*` uses just AVX512F instruction set which can run on Knights landing. But it is a discontinued product (since 2018) and not sure how much we should care about it. We could just move them to AVX512_SKX or AVX3 ( as defined by highway).

> Highway/Universal Intrinsics choice.

Reviewer 2: Sounds good to me.

> Highway/Universal Intrinsics choice.

Reviewer 3: I added the text just below here, and this is further discussed later in the NEP. I will resolve this discussion.

On Windows, MSVC may have to be avoided, as a result of Highway's use of
pragmas which are less well supported by MSVC. This means that we likely have
to build our wheels with clang-cl or Mingw-w64. Both of those should work - we
merged clang-cl support a while back (see `gh-20866`_), and SciPy builds with
Mingw-w64. It may however impact other redistributors or end users who build
from source on Windows.

The potential impact on licensing because of Highway's use of the Apache 2.0

> license needs discussing before Highway can be accepted. Or Highway would have

Author: I'll try to be more explicit. Different concerns:

1. Apache 2.0 and GPLv2 are incompatible (a fading concern over the years, but still may have some impact)
2. We advertise NumPy as BSD-3 licensed. Including fully compatibly-licensed code like MIT and public domain code is fine. If we include Apache 2.0 code, we have to advertise all of NumPy not as BSD-3 but as mixed-licensed.
3. In addition to (2), if it's about mixing code within files, the actual license tracking becomes quite complicated. 

Eventually there may become a point where the benefits of including Apache 2.0 licensed code outweighs any of these downsides. Maybe use of Highway is that point. But it's still an important part of the decision, and has some consequences which are at least annoying to have to deal with.

@rkern may want to add some more color to the above.

> license needs discussing before Highway can be accepted. Or Highway would have

Reviewer 2: Thanks. About GPL incompatibility: I believe that is only an issue in one direction, if Apache2 code (i.e. Highway itself) were to depend on GPLed code, which would require the whole to be released under GPL. See https://www.apache.org/licenses/GPL-compatibility.html.

AFAIK there is no issue if someone else is GPL licensed and includes Numpy, with or without Highway. I also believe there is no need to declare Numpy as mixed-license because Apache2 does not impose additional limitations on users.

> license needs discussing before Highway can be accepted. Or Highway would have

Reviewer 5: No, there is still an issue with GPLv2. Projects using GPLv2 do not allow Apache 2.0 code into their codebase because of clauses in the Apache 2.0 license. Putting Apache 2.0 code into numpy means that GPLv2 codebases cannot/will not be able to use numpy.

> Despite our best efforts, the FSF has never considered the Apache License to be compatible with GPL version 2, citing the patent termination and indemnification provisions as restrictions not present in the older GPL license. The Apache Software Foundation believes that you should always try to obey the constraints expressed by the copyright holder when redistributing their work.

> license needs discussing before Highway can be accepted. Or Highway would have

Reviewer 2: hm, I see. That is unfortunate. Do we know of any GPLv2 users?

> license needs discussing before Highway can be accepted. Or Highway would have

Reviewer 5: [Certainly](https://pypi.org/search/?c=License+%3A%3A+OSI+Approved+%3A%3A+GNU+General+Public+License+v2+%28GPLv2%29&o=&q=numpy). It's not a perfect search, but clicking through, I do see a number of recently-maintained projects that specify GPLv2 without the "any later version" language that would allow users to upgrade to GPLv3. Whether that's an intentional omission or not is unknown in each case, but I do see some that depend on libraries that [some](https://pypi.org/project/glmnet2/) depend on external libraries [that also omit it](https://github.com/cran/glmnet) and thus don't have much choice in the matter.

> license needs discussing before Highway can be accepted. Or Highway would have

Reviewer 3: I agree with @rkern: We don't want to muddy the waters and provide friction for people to include NumPy in their projects.

> license needs discussing before Highway can be accepted. Or Highway would have

Reviewer 2: Got it. I will check internally about permission for dual-licensing.

> license needs discussing before Highway can be accepted. Or Highway would have

Reviewer 2: FYI I am waiting to hear from our open-source licensing folks.

> license needs discussing before Highway can be accepted. Or Highway would have

Reviewer 5: Thank you! It's much appreciated!

> license needs discussing before Highway can be accepted. Or Highway would have

Reviewer 2: :) Good news, the initial opinion is positive. Sounds like dual-licensing ought to be possible, and as a courtesy, I've filed https://github.com/google/highway/issues/1562 to inform folks and ask if there are any concerns.
We will follow up to confirm. FYI I will be out of office tomorrow.

> license needs discussing before Highway can be accepted. Or Highway would have

Reviewer 2: It's looking good and I believe we will be able to move forward with dual-licensing. Let's wait another week for contributors to register any concerns (unlikely).

> license needs discussing before Highway can be accepted. Or Highway would have

Reviewer 2: To clarify: the [current patch](https://github.com/google/highway/pull/1605) proposes BSD-3 as the other license alternative. The [meeting agenda](https://hackmd.io/76o-IxCjQX2mOXO_wwkcpg?both) mentions MIT. I think we could still change it at this point, but when notifying Highway contributors we mentioned BSD-3. Is that also OK for you?

> license needs discussing before Highway can be accepted. Or Highway would have

Author: Either way works, BSD-3 and MIT are pretty much interchangeable.

> license needs discussing before Highway can be accepted. Or Highway would have

Reviewer 2: Thanks for confirming. Good news, the change is now approved, submitted, and shows up on Github. It's official :)

to have to dual-license under Apache 2.0 and an MIT/BSD type license.

High-level considerations
-------------------------

.. note::

   Currently this section attempts to cover each topic separately, and
   comparing the future use of a NumPy-specific C++ implementation vs. use of
   Google Highway with our own numerical routines on top of that. It does not
   (yet) assume a decision or proposed decision is made. Hence this NEP is not
   "this is proposed" with another option in the Alternatives section, but
   rather a side-by-side comparison.

    
Development effort and long-term maintainability
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Moving to Highway is likely to be a significant development effort.
Longer-term, this will hopefully be offset by Highway itself having more
maintainer bandwidth to deal with ongoing issues in compiler support and adding
new platforms. It should increase the bus factor of SIMD support in NumPy to
some extent. That said - the Highway repository also seems to show that its bus

> factor is low - it was 1 until the start of 2023, and now it's perhaps 2.

Reviewer 2: FYI 12 Google engineers have open-sourced commits to Highway. We have two others besides myself able to approve and merge changes.

Author: Thanks for the context. I can add some more detail/stats. It's probably similar for NumPy; the bus factor calculation is based on commit history and probably still right though, that's more than number of people with a few commits and commit rights.

Reviewer 2: Fair point. Currently there is no need for others to do what I am doing because it's my full-time role. If I were actually to be hit by a bus, it is likely that one or several of the others would take over :)

Reviewer 4: This is where the line from Highway README page `This is not an officially supported Google product` gets a little concerning. I don't see this on other google open source projects though. Its very well possible I might be reading too much into it, but do you mind explaining what's different about Highway?

Reviewer 5: That disclaimer is on most open source projects that have Googler contributors.

Reviewer 5: C.f. [this search on Github](https://github.com/search?q=%22This+is+not+an+officially+supported+Google+product%22&type=code). It's very boilerplate.

Reviewer 4: Its boilerplate for what google calls "pet" or "hobby" projects (see  https://opensource.google/documentation/reference/releasing#faq) which requires them to have this disclaimer. From: https://opensource.google/documentation/reference/releasing/publishing .

> We do this to help set appropriate expectations for users of these projects. Projects that include this label may not be staffed like larger, supported products such as Android, Chromium, or Go are. Support and/or new releases may be limited.

Highway isn't as big a project as Android or Chromium or Go, so probably doesn't matter.

Reviewer 2: As briefly mentioned in the meeting: Highway is an engineering-led project that meets a developer need. The fact that it is not a user-facing product subject to business-level decisions about when to (dis)continue a project can be seen as helpful :)

Reviewer 3: I suggest we remove the last two sentences from the NEP. We cannot predict future developments. so we should leave the more vague hope.

Highway being used by other projects, like Chromium and `JPEG XL`_ (see
`this more complete list <https://google.github.io/highway/en/master/README.html#examples>`__
in the Highway documentation), does imply that there is likely to be a benefit
of a wider range of testing and bug reporting/fixing.

One concern is that new instructions may have to be added, and that that is
often best done as part of the process of developing the numerical kernel that
needs the instruction. This will be a little more clumsy if the instruction
lives in Highway which is a git submodule inside the NumPy repo - there will be

> a need to implement a temporary/generic version first, and then update the

Reviewer 4: I think concern here is relative to a solution where NumPy owns and maintains its own C++ universal intrinsic. Adding new optimizations which requires new intrinsics (or some combination of) will be a lot easier if the entire patch is in one PR and reviewed once in one place. Making changes to a git submodule means having to go through two separate pull requests which will slow things down and makes developing a new feature a tad bit harder. I should also point out that benchmarking perf with a patch that makes changes to submodule is a pain point too. You either have to upstream your changes to submodule first before benchmarking (which isn't always possible) or jump through git submodule hoops to ensure asv builds your branch with the changes in submodule.

> a need to implement a temporary/generic version first, and then update the

Reviewer: Can you elaborate on why that's not possible by simply extending Highway temporarily within NumPy? You seem to be making the assumption that we will always have to update within Highway first, whilst another approach would be to build the intrinsic for NumPy's use case and then attempt to upstream it. This mirrors the development process which took place with `npyv_negative_@sfx@` where it appeared in `tanh` first and then got ported to a more central place later (what we have today).

Any improvements in Highway to adopt a new intrinsic would then allow us to delete the code, but we still retain a straight forward development flow from a NumPy point of view.

> a need to implement a temporary/generic version first, and then update the

Reviewer 4: > Can you elaborate on why that's not possible by simply extending Highway temporarily within NumPy? 

You absolutely could, but I think we would want to keep that to a minimum. BTW, going through two pull requests isn't a big deal either. I mentioned it because it does change the workflow from a developer point of view.

> a need to implement a temporary/generic version first, and then update the

Reviewer: I don't understand? Why would we want to change the workflow when we can keep it similar to how it is now?

> a need to implement a temporary/generic version first, and then update the

Reviewer 2: Just to be explicit about the proposed workflow. Because adding ops in Highway is just a matter of defining a new function in namespace hwy::HWY_NAMESPACE, this can be done in numpy code `#ifndef HWY_OP_NEGATIVE` (or whatever the op is called). So you'd put the same implementation that will go into Highway, inside numpy for purposes of testing/benchmarking, which you can thus do in a single pull request without delay. And when Highway adopts this new op, it defines `HWY_OP_NEGATIVE` so there is no conflict.

> a need to implement a temporary/generic version first, and then update the

Reviewer 3: I am going to resolve this discussion, as I think the text adequately reflects the slight inconvenience of maintaining a forked subrepo.

submodule after upstreaming the new intrinsic.
https://numpy.org/doc/1.25/reference/simd/

> Documentation-wise, Highway would be a clear win. NumPy's

Reviewer 6: gh-21057 provides a rich reference too auto generated by doxygen, check [build artifact]( https://output.circle-artifacts.com/output/job/6a58c19b-2137-4b00-80a7-50e532c4d7b3/artifacts/0/doc/build/html/reference/simd/intrinsics/index.html)

Reviewer 2: I agree that the documentation of the work-in-progress C++ functions is nicely structured and thorough. There are additional topics that can be interesting, e.g. an FAQ, implementation details, design rationale. If we are pooling our efforts, maybe we can combine what's best from both sets of documentation :)

`the Highway docs`_.

Licensing
~~~~~~~~~

Highway is licensed under Apache 2.0, which is incompatible with NumPy's BSD-3
license. Apache 2.0 is not a copyleft license, hence if we'd use Highway as a
build-time dependency only, that would have no impact on NumPy's licensing situation.
However, we don't want to add a new build-time dependency - at least certainly
not before we have removed all traces of the ``setup.py``-based build (it's a lot
easier with Meson). Pulling in Highway as a git submodule and shipping it in sdist's
would change NumPy's license status.

That license status change would still be manageable perhaps, if it'd be contained to
one git submodule that redistributors can swap out for an external dependency though.
However, there is a second issue: reusing code snippets and potentially larger chunks
of code from Highway itself, its docs, or other Highway-using projects would not work
without changing NumPy's licensing status to a mix of BSD-3/MIT and Apache 2.0.

As of now (July 2023), the only Apache 2.0 usages inside the NumPy repository are
the vendored ``mathjax`` code to build the docs, and the code for the PCG64

> random number generator which was relicensed as MIT for NumPy's use.

Reviewer 3: Now that Highway is dual-licensed I will remove the above section.

Author: I think putting in at least a footnote that Highway went through a relicensing to make it easier for MIT/BSD-licensed projects like NumPy to adopt it, in response to this NEP, would make sense. It's part of the history of the discussions around this NEP, and I'm sure it took a bit of talking to get it done.

Reviewer 3: OK, I will add.

targets for Highway `here <https://github.com/google/highway/#targets>`__
(it's roughly per CPU family) and for NumPy
`here <https://numpy.org/doc/1.25/reference/simd/build-options.html#supported-features>`__
(roughly per SIMD instruction set). Hence with Highway we'd lose some
granularity - but that is probably fine, we don't really need this level of
granularity, and there isn't much evidence that users explicitly play with this
to squeeze out the last bit of performance for their own CPU.

Compilation strategy for multiple targets and runtime dispatching
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Highway compiles once while using preprocessing tricks to generate multiple
stanzas for each CPU feature within the same compilation unit (see the
``foreach_target.h`` usage and dynamic dispatch docs for how that is done).
Universal Intrinsics generate multiple compilation units, one for each CPU
feature group, and compiles multiple times, linking them all together (with
different names) for runtime dispatch. The Highway technique may not work
reliably on MSVC, the Universal Intrinsic technique does work on MSVC.

> Which one is more robust? The experts disagree. Jan thinks that the Highway

Author: The "build systems come and go" argument is a good one - I like it. Also, we have scenarios like Bazel users (like Google) pulling in NumPy and rewriting the build system for their monorepo needs. That doesn't have to be a primary concern for us, but indeed it's nicer if there was less dependence on build system features.

> Which one is more robust? The experts disagree. Jan thinks that the Highway

Reviewer 2: Makes sense. I've also learned that the hard way. We started with Bazel, then came many users who wanted CMake, then  Chrome with their GN.

> Which one is more robust? The experts disagree. Jan thinks that the Highway

Reviewer 6: From my perspective, your hypothesis here is not accurate. First, the SIMD frameworks are unstable and constantly changing, being replaced by newer ones more quickly than any build system. For example, as far as I know, Highway primarily exists to replace these frameworks that don't support scalable SIMD extensions. Am I correct? Additionally, does it provide a portable dynamic solution? So, in the future, projects may consider adopting lightweight JIT solutions, which is something we should use one day. This would eventually lead us to replace Highway, sooner or later. In general, nothing is static in this universe except CMake :).

However, I have proven to you that it's possible to support scalable SIMD extensions for frameworks that use object classes and operators by relying on the optimizer. Therefore, it would have been better to support a framework like xsimd or std instead of creating a new one.

Regarding the portable dynamic dispatching solution, we did support a similar solution based on compiler target attributes, which is similar to the current approach used by Highway. So, this wasn't new in NumPy.

The reason for replacing it was mainly due to compiler bugs, the difficulty in managing, debugging, and supporting MSVC. Even with compiler target attributes, we had to test each attribute against the compiler to ensure it was running correctly. Otherwise, we had to track each compiler version or subversion to mark it as a broken platform similar to what Highway do, which is not a practical approach for projects like NumPy.

However, even with the use of Highway's dynamic dispatching, we still need to deal with the build system. For example,  provide build options to allow the user to disable or enable certain features, raise the baseline features, or support native features. we should also provide a build log to track the enabled features and generated kernels.

> Which one is more robust? The experts disagree. Jan thinks that the Highway

Reviewer 3: Is there a "takeaway" from this discussion that should be added to the NEP, or is the text accurate here?

> Which one is more robust? The experts disagree. Jan thinks that the Highway

Reviewer 6: > Yes, that is possible. Though I hear about database projects moving away from these again because they are difficult to inspect/debug.

[asmjit](https://github.com/asmjit/asmjit) is a promising project, we may use it one day to generate our ufunc loops from python with SIMD support and with ability to support loop fusion. [QuestDB](https://github.com/questdb/questdb) is already use it.

> Which one is more robust? The experts disagree. Jan thinks that the Highway

Reviewer 6: >  The one remaining downside is that numpy is then quite fundamentally tied to Meson, and it will be difficult to switch to or even support other build systems.

I agree but this also gives the ability to support C language which is important to deal with our legacy C code especially when it comes to cache and tracing the dispatches calls.

> Which one is more robust? The experts disagree. Jan thinks that the Highway

Reviewer 3: I will add this

Both agree the meson build system allows specifying object link order,
which produces more consistent builds. However that does tie NumPy to meson.

Matti thinks the current build strategy is working well for NumPy and the
advantages of changing the build and runtime dispatch, with possible unknown
instabilities outweighs the advantages that fully adopting Highway may bring.

We want to move from C to C++, which will naturally involve a significant
amount of refactoring, for two main reasons:

- get rid of the NumPy-specific templating language for more expressive C++
- this would make using sizeless intrinsics (like for SVE) easier.

In addition, we see the following considerations:

- If we use Highway, we would need to switch the C++ wrappers from universal
  intrinsics to Highway. On the other hand, the work to move to C++ is not
  complete.
- If we use Highway, we'd need to rewrite existing kernels using Highway
  intrinsics. But again, moving to C++ requires touching all those kernels
  anyway.
- One concern regarding Highway was whether it is possible to obtain a function
  pointer for an architecture-specific function instead of calling that
  function directly. This so that we can be sure that calling 1-D inner loop
  many times for a single Python API invocation does not incur the dispatching
  overhead many times. This was investigated: this can be done with Highway
  too.
- A second concern was whether it's possible with Highway to allow the user at
  runtime to select or disable dispatching to certain instruction sets. This is
  possible.

> - Use of tags in the C++ implementation (Sayed's concern). TODO: describe in

Reviewer 3: Allowing flexibility is the upside. What is the downside? Is the resulting code slower?

> - Use of tags in the C++ implementation (Sayed's concern). TODO: describe in

Reviewer 2: The downside is that the extra d arguments use a template argument, and the testing unit appears to want to export single (non-template) functions, so exporting them all would involve many functions.
A reasonable workaround would be to only export a subset of the tags (mostly just full vectors) for the testing unit.

> - Use of tags in the C++ implementation (Sayed's concern). TODO: describe in

Reviewer 2: > important to identify the values of the higher parts, whether undefined or set to zero.

Good point. Would it be OK to define it as either zero or a broadcast load? It's never random garbage.

Can you quantify the 'much simpler'? It seems to me that we are proposing to add half/quarter etc variants of all the various load operations (masked, partial, unaligned etc), that would mean more ops to test.

> - Use of tags in the C++ implementation (Sayed's concern). TODO: describe in

Reviewer 3: I will edit this to not dive into details. Is this adequate:

"Use of tags in the C++ implementation reduces code duplication but the added templating makes C-level testing and tracing more complicated"

  more detail.

The ``_simd`` unit testing module
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Rewriting the ``_simd testing`` module to use C++ was done very recently in PR
`gh-24069`_. It depends on the main PR for the move to C++, `gh-21057`_.
It allows one to access the C++ intrinsics with almost the same signature, but
from Python. This is a great way not only for testing, but also for designing
new SIMD kernels.

It may be possible to add a similar testing and prototyping feature to Highway
(which uses plain ``googletest``), however currently the NumPy way is quite a

> bit nicer.

Reviewer 3: The `_simd` module goes beyond testing the intrisics themselves and allows combining intrinsics for testing out new math kernels from python, which can be convenient when designing kernels as a complete rebuild is not required.

> bit nicer.

Reviewer: Ahhhh, got it on the second pass, thanks for reiterating it for my benefit 😸

Math routines
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Math or numerical routines are written at a higher level of abstraction than
the universal intrinsics that are the main focus of this NEP. Highway has only
a limited number of math routines, and they are not precise enough for NumPy's
needs. So either way, NumPy's existing routines (which use universal
intrinsics) will stay, and if we go the Highway route they'll simply have to

> use Highway primitives internally.

Reviewer 3: Yes, that is still in the works. We have done some work to refactor the `errorstate` to make adding additional parameters easier. With that, the point stands that we will need the precise kernels for the default behavior.

> use Highway primitives internally.

Reviewer: Then I'd suggest that we edit to something that says we may be able to get value from the math and sort routines as well as other features of Highway?

> use Highway primitives internally.

Reviewer 4: If we end up using Highway, leveraging `vqsort` across all supported architectures would be a no brainer.

There may be other libraries that have numerical routines that can be reused in
NumPy (e.g., from SLEEF, or perhaps from JPEG XL or some other Highway-using
libraries). There may be a small benefit here, but likely it doesn't matter too
much.

Supported and missing intrinsics
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Some specific intrinsics that NumPy needs may be missing from Highway, e.g.:

- Supporting partial operations on both contiguous and non-contiguous memory
  access, with both single and pair offsets. Pair offsets is crucial for
  complex kernels that require 64-bit/32-bit stride alignment. Identified
  intrinsics related to this:

>   - Highway's ``LoadInterleaved2`` would have to be extended with ``*Till``

Reviewer: I believe this would be `MaskedLoadInterleaved2`, similar to:
https://github.com/google/highway/blob/5030a388acc3dcfada259217b9a1d387383b7a2c/hwy/ops/arm_neon-inl.h#L3225 ?
```suggestion
  - Highway's ``LoadInterleaved2`` would have to be extended with ``Masked*``
```

Reviewer 6: Nothing to do with interleave or de-interleave, as I mentioned before in https://github.com/numpy/numpy/issues/24084#issuecomment-1621659240:

>Just to clarify, pair load/store intrinsics do not perform any interleave or de-interleave operation.
>Their purpose is to handle complex load and store operations with misaligned strides,
such as supporting a 64-bit stride on a 128-bit complex data type. We can discuss in more detail at a later time.

Using intrinsics that support mask load/store operations can have a negative impact on SIMD extensions that don't natively support these operations. It is recommended to be cautious when using such intrinsics in order to maintain optimal performance across different SIMD extensions.

Furthermore, when working with AVX512, it is advisable to minimize the usage of scatter/gather operations whenever possible. These operations tend to have high latency and throughput, which can affect performance significantly.

Reviewer: I think this is straying into technical detail, I would expect Highway to present an interface that *looks correct* but may not directly map to hardware intrinsics if there's a more optimal approach.

Reviewer 2: FYI a contributor has just [added LoadN/StoreN](https://github.com/google/highway/pull/1620).

Reviewer 6: > FYI a contributor has just added LoadN/StoreN.

Only covers contiguous memory operation.

Reviewer 3: I will edit this section to remove the specifics

>   - Highway's ``LoadInterleaved2`` would have to be extended with ``*Till``

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Highway needs to implement the following memory operations, which mainly deal with non-contiguous memory operations and partial load/store.

     | Name             |u8 |i8 |u16|i16|u32|i32|u64|i64|f32|f64|
     |:-----------------|:-:|:-:|:-:|:-:|:-:|:-:|:-:|:-:|:-:|:-:|
     | LoadPairTill     | - | - | - | - | x | x | x | x | x | x |
     | LoadTill         | - | - | - | - | x | x | x | x | x | x |
     | IsLoadable       | - | - | - | - | x | x | x | x | x | x |
     | IsStorable       | - | - | - | - | x | x | x | x | x | x |
     | Loadn            | - | - | - | - | x | x | x | x | x | x |
     | LoadnTill        | - | - | - | - | x | x | x | x | x | x |
     | LoadnPair        | - | - | - | - | x | x | x | x | x | x |
     | LoadnPairTill    | - | - | - | - | x | x | x | x | x | x |
     | Storen           | - | - | - | - | x | x | x | x | x | x |
     | StorenTill       | - | - | - | - | x | x | x | x | x | x |
     | StorenPair       | - | - | - | - | x | x | x | x | x | x |
     | StorenPairTill   | - | - | - | - | x | x | x | x | x | x |
     | Lookup128        | - | - | - | - | x | x | x | x | x | x |
```
These operations are described in the new C++ reference section [memory]( https://output.circle-artifacts.com/output/job/6a58c19b-2137-4b00-80a7-50e532c4d7b3/artifacts/0/doc/build/html/reference/simd/intrinsics/memory.html).

Furthermore, Highway needs to identify the behavior of comparisons, including whether they are signaling/non-signaling or ordered and unordered. This information is fully described in the new reference. Please refer to the [comparison](https://output.circle-artifacts.com/output/job/6a58c19b-2137-4b00-80a7-50e532c4d7b3/artifacts/0/doc/build/html/reference/simd/intrinsics/comparison.html) reference for detailed information.

Another aspect that seems to be missing is the integer division by scalar. This operation is fully described [here](https://output.circle-artifacts.com/output/job/6a58c19b-2137-4b00-80a7-50e532c4d7b3/artifacts/0/doc/build/html/reference/simd/intrinsics/arithmetic.html#_CPPv4I00E3Div4TVecRK4TVecRK4Vec3I5TLaneE) as well.

Reviewer 2: Looks like the CI output link no longer works. Is there some other way to see your nicely formatted documentation?

Regarding comparisons, Highway uses _OQ, so ordered and quiet/non-signalling. Would that work for our purposes?

FYI float16 support is [mostly done](https://github.com/google/highway/pull/1608) but not yet tested and requires some more work (casts) for GCC.

We didn't add integer division to Highway because it is generally inefficient and we haven't yet needed it. Is it commonly used in numpy? One option if the division is by a few constant values is to use libdivide, or a compiler, to translate that into vectorized mul by the inverse.

Reviewer 3: But the nep link on the top line of the rendered artifacts point to the absolute NEP path, not the relative one. [here](https://output.circle-artifacts.com/output/job/1e437a73-c8a9-4046-9b4b-3989c816f3ce/artifacts/0/doc/neps/_build/html/nep-0054-simd-cpp-highway.html) is the latest version, that I got from the [CircleCI workflow artifact listing](https://app.circleci.com/pipelines/github/numpy/numpy/20310/workflows/7b238750-f9eb-4b32-8a20-a829db3d2f54/jobs/32828/artifacts)

Reviewer 3: I would prefer a high-level summary of missing functionality. How about:

- Highway is missing non-contiguous memory operations and partial load/store operations.
- Highway needs to identify the behavior of comparisons, including whether they are signaling/non-signaling or ordered and unordered.
- Highway is missing integer division by a scalar.

Reviewer 3: The latest version of PR #2107 's documentation is [here](https://output.circle-artifacts.com/output/job/8ba4034e-8602-48ae-8678-f7e839dd9edf/artifacts/0/doc/build/html/reference/simd/intrinsics/index.html)

Reviewer 2: Updates:
- we have non-contiguous ops, but they use Gather/Scatter and are thus slow. What's missing is special-cases such as pairs of doubles using 128-bit loads.
- as of last week we have partial Load/Store and also LoadNOr.

Comparisons, reductions and integer div are indeed missing.

Reviewer 6: > I would prefer a high-level summary of missing functionality. How about:

Here's a list of missing intrinsics:

- Vec<TLane> LoadPairTill(const TLane *ptr, size_t plen, TLane fill0, TLane fill1)
    Partially pair loads N-lane vector contents from memory.

- Vec<TLane> Loadn(const TLane *ptr, intptr_t stride)
    Load N-lane vector contents from non-contiguous memory block.

- Vec<TLane> LoadnTill(const TLane *ptr, intptr_t stride, size_t len, TLane fill)
    Partially loads N-lane vector contents from a non-contiguous memory block.

- Vec<TLane> LoadnPair(const TLane *ptr, intptr_t stride)
    Pair loads N-lane vector contents from non-contiguous memory block.

- Vec<TLane> LoadnPairTill(const TLane *ptr, intptr_t stride, size_t plen, TLane fill0, TLane fill1)
    Partially pair loads N-lane vector contents from non-contiguous memory block.

- void StorePairTill(TLane *ptr, size_t plen, const Vec<TLane> &a)
    Partially pair store N-lane vector contents to memory.

- void Storen(TLane *ptr, intptr_t stride, const Vec<TLane> &a)
    Store N-lane vector contents to non-contiguous memory.

- void StorenTill(TLane *ptr, intptr_t stride, size_t len, const Vec<TLane> &a)
    Partially store N-lane vector contents to non-contiguous memory.

- void StorenPair(TLane *ptr, intptr_t stride, const Vec<TLane> &a)
    Pair store N-lane vector contents to non-contiguous memory.

- void StorenPairTill(TLane *ptr, intptr_t stride, size_t plen, const Vec<TLane> &a)
    Partially pair store N-lane vector contents to non-contiguous memory.

- Vec<TLane> Lookup128(const TLane *table, const Vec<MakeUnsigned<TLane>> &idx)
    Perform a lookup operation on a 128-byte table using lane indices.

- TVec MaxProp(const TVec &a, const TVec &b)
    Maximum with Floating-Point with Non-NaN Propagation.

- TVec MinProp(const TVec &a, const TVec &b)
    Minimum with Floating-Point with Non-NaN Propagation.

- TVec MaxPropNan(const TVec &a, const TVec &b)
    Maximum with Floating-Point with NaN Propagation.

- TVec MinPropNan(const TVec &a, const TVec &b)
    Minimum with with NaN Propagation.

- TLane ReduceMax(const TVec &a)
    Native Reduce Maximum.

- TLane ReduceMin(const TVec &a)
    Native Reduce Minimum.

- TLane ReduceMaxProp(const TVec &a)
    Reduce Maximum Floating-Point with Non-NaN Propagation.

- TLane ReduceMinProp(const TVec &a)
    Reduce Minimum Floating-Point with Non-NaN Propagation.

- TLane ReduceMaxPropNan(const TVec &a)
    Reduce Maximum Floating-Point with NaN Propagation.

- TLane ReduceMinPropNan(const TVec &a)
    Reduce Minimum Floating-Point with NaN Propagation.

- TLane ReduceMaxProp(const TVec &a)
    Reduce Maximum Floating-Point with Non-NaN Propagation.

- TLane ReduceMinProp(const TVec &a)
    Reduce Minimum Floating-Point with Non-NaN Propagation.

- TLane ReduceMaxPropNan(const TVec &a)
    Reduce Maximum Floating-Point with NaN Propagation.

- TLane ReduceMinPropNan(const TVec &a)
    Reduce Minimum Floating-Point with NaN Propagation.

- Vec3<TLane> Divisor(TLane d)
    Generate the precomputed parameters of the divisor.

- TVec Div(const TVec &a, const Vec3<TLane> &b)
    Performs element-wise integer division between the lanes of the input vector ‘a’ and the scalar value b.

- TVec MulAddSub(const TVec &a, const TVec &b, const TVec &c)
    Multiply the lanes of two vectors, add the lanes of a third vector for odd lanes, and subtract for even lanes.

- TVec IfAdd/IfSub/IfDiv(const TMask &m, const TVec &a, const TVec &b, const TVec &c)
    Conditional add/sub/div of vectors based on a mask.

In addition(not supported yet), I was working in a patch to support the following AVX512 operations which is required in order to replace SVML kernels:
- _mm512_getmant_ps/_pd
- _mm512_scalef_ps/_pd
- _mm512_getexp_ps/_pd

> as of last week we have partial Load/Store and also LoadNOr.

Current Highway partial Load/Store only supports contiguous memory operations according to the following testing unite:
LoadN:
https://github.com/google/highway/blob/ba0900a4957b929390ab73827235557959234fea/hwy/tests/memory_test.cc#L350-L404
StoreN:
https://github.com/google/highway/blob/ba0900a4957b929390ab73827235557959234fea/hwy/tests/memory_test.cc#L572-L634

Reviewer 2: Thank you @seiko2plus for making the list :) I am back in the office and adding it to our list of pending ops.

FYI `ReduceMax/ReduceMin` can already be expressed as `GetLane(Max/MinOfLanes())`.

> Current Highway partial Load/Store only supports contiguous memory operations

We also have MaskedGather/Scatter. The mask can be obtained for partial N via FirstN, right?

Reviewer 6: >We also have MaskedGather/Scatter. The mask can be obtained for partial N via FirstN, right?

if performance regression isn't matter then yes, sure.

Reviewer 3: I think it is too much of a moving target to publish this table in a permanent document. Maybe it belongs in a Highway issue instead, and then we can refer to the issue?

    support (only load partial vectors) - that seems doable.
  - ``Loadn``/``LoadnPair`` can mostly be implemented on top of ``Gather*``,
    with some specializations.

- ``Lookup128``: the main purpose of this intrinsic is to provide a mapping to
  the ``_mm512_permutex2var_*`` functions, so it performs 32/bit elements on
  32-bit data types and 16 elements on 64-bit datatypes; it was need during the
  replacement of intel SVML with universal intrinsics.

On the other hand, Highway has more instructions that NumPy's universal
intrinsics, so it's possible that some future needs for NumPy kernels may
already be met there.

Meson changes to be upstreamed (if no Highway runtime dispatching)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Build time detection needs a new module in Meson to detect all the CPU features

Author: Note that this is in the "no Highway" scenario only (see section title).

> Build time detection needs a new module in Meson to detect all the CPU features

Reviewer 2: Ah - I had understood it as no Highway _runtime dispatch_. If using static dispatch, Highway can still take care of this. If no Highway at all, then it's clear :)

`here <https://mesonbuild.com/Reference-tables.html#cpu-families>`__)).

However, given the timelines involved (see the next section) it's not unlikely
that we'd have to complete the Meson SIMD support for the 1.26.0 release even
if we choose Highway for 2.0 and beyond.

1.26 and 2.0 releases - timing and integration plans
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The plans for our next releases are related, because for Python 3.12 support we
must use Meson as the build system (because of the removal of ``distutils``),
and the currently remaining task for completing the migration to Meson is SIMD
support. The timeline for upcoming releases is:

- Aug 4th, 2023: Python 3.12.0rc1 release date - we need to release NumPy
  ``1.26.0b1`` (or ``rc1``) around this date, to ensure we don't block
  downstream projects from using Python 3.12. This pre-release doesn't need
  SIMD support (performance doesn't matter yet for a beta/rc), although it
  would be nice to have included already.
- Oct 4th, 2023: Python 3.12.0 release date - we need a NumPy 1.26.0 release
  including SIMD support before this date.
- Dec 31, 2023: NumPy 2.0.0 (could run into January, not a hard deadline)

> The current plan is to branch ``maintenance/1.26.x`` off of

Reviewer 7: I'm thinking we don't even need a branch, just update the tags and the version in meson.build. As I understand it, the main reason for 1.26 is compatibility tracking.
